Bengt/pgf specs (#1092)
anoma/namada: documentation/specs/src/economics/public-goods-funding.md

A new multisignature address will be constructed through the CLI with the following command

```bash!
namadaw address-multsig gen
--owners Vec<"address1", "address2", "address3", ...> \
--threshold <number-of-signers-necessary>
```

The council will be resonsible to publish this address to voters and express their desired `spending_cap`. This will be done directly to the ledger through the following CLI command:

```bash!
namadac pgf-broadcast \
--council "<multisig-address>" \
--spending-cap "<proposed-spending-cap>"
```
The `--spending-cap` argument is a `float` $0 < x \leq 1$, which indicates the maximum proportion of the total funds available to the PGF council that the PGF council is able to spend during their term.

A council consisting of the same members should also be able to propose multiple spending caps (with the same multisig address). These will be voted on as separate councils and votes counted separately.

### Voting on the council

> Once the council has been constructed and brodcasted, it can be voted on by governance particpants. There will be a window in between which the `PgfProposal` was passed and when the final votes for the new council will be accepted. This is a governance parameter.

Author: I meant like we let `PgfProposal` pass, which says we will elect a new council. Then there should be some "voting period" with a start and an end. That is what this [start, end] period is what I mean when I say "window".

> Once the council has been constructed and brodcasted, it can be voted on by governance particpants. There will be a window in between which the `PgfProposal` was passed and when the final votes for the new council will be accepted. This is a governance parameter.

Reviewer: Governance proposals already have a voting window, I think there's no need to state it again here

> Once the council has been constructed and brodcasted, it can be voted on by governance particpants. There will be a window in between which the `PgfProposal` was passed and when the final votes for the new council will be accepted. This is a governance parameter.

Author: But there is a difference right? This governance proposal is just to say "we are voting for a new PGF council". That voting window is already implemented. We also need one for the time in which we decide *which* council is elected. Or am I missing smth?

> Once the council has been constructed and brodcasted, it can be voted on by governance particpants. There will be a window in between which the `PgfProposal` was passed and when the final votes for the new council will be accepted. This is a governance parameter.

Reviewer: I don't think we need anything more than what we already have. Someone proposes to vote for a new council. This proposal has a voting window inside which we accept incoming votes. When the voting period is over we simply tally the received votes and elect the winning council (if any)

### Motivation
# PGF specs

> **Public goods** are non-excludable non-rivalrous items which provide benefits of some sort to their users. Examples include languages, open-source software, research, designs, Earth's atmosphere, and art (conceptually - a physical painting is excludable and rivalrous, but the painting as-such is not). Namada's software stack, supporting research, and ecosystem tooling are all public goods, as are the information ecosystem and education which provide for the technology to be used safety, the hardware designs and software stacks (e.g. instruction set, OS, programming language) on which it runs, and the atmosphere and biodiverse environment which renders its operation possible. Without these things, Namada could not exist, and without their continued sustenance it will not continue to. Public goods, by their nature as non-excludable and non-rivalrous, are mis-modeled by economic systems (such as payment-for-goods) built upon the assumption of scarcity, and are usually either under-funded (relative to their public benefit) or funded in ways which require artificial scarcity and thus a public loss. For this reason, it is in the interest of Namada to help out, where possible, in funding the public goods upon which its existence depends in ways which do not require the introduction of artificial scarcity, balancing the costs of available resources and operational complexity. 

Reviewer 2: we should keep this part, it's important as context

## Voting for the Council

### Design precedent

> There is a lot of existing research into public-goods funding to which justice cannot be done here. Most mechanisms fall into two categories: need-based and results-based, where need-based allocation schemes attempt to pay for particular public goods on the basis of cost-of-resources, and results-based allocation schemes attempt to pay (often retroactively) for particular public goods on the basis of expected or assessed benefits to a community and thus create incentives for the production of public goods providing substantial benefits (for a longer exposition on retroactive PGF, see [here](https://medium.com/ethereum-optimism/retroactive-public-goods-funding-33c9b7d00f0c), although the idea is [not new](https://astralcodexten.substack.com/p/lewis-carroll-invented-retroactive)). Additional constraints to consider include the cost-of-time of governance structures (which renders e.g. direct democracy on all funding proposals very inefficient), the necessity of predictable funding in order to make long-term organisational decision-making, the propensity for bike-shedding and damage to the information commons in large-scale public debate (especially without an identity layer or Sybil resistance), and the engineering costs of implementations.

Reviewer 2: we should keep this part, it's important as context

### Initiating the vote
Voting for the council is handled by Governance in the PGFProposal type.

### Mechanism
The governance proposal will include the following message

Namada instantiates a dual proactive/retroactive public-goods funding model, stewarded by a public-goods council elected by limited liquid democracy.
```rust!
struct PGFProposal{
id: u64
content: Vec<u8>,
author: Address,
r#type: PGFCouncil,
votingStartEpoch: Epoch,
votingEndEpoch: Epoch,
graceEpoch: Epoch,
}
```

> This requires the following protocol components:

Reviewer 2: deleting this is fine :+1:

> The council will be resonsible to publish this address to voters and express their desired `spending_cap`. 

Reviewer 2: how do they do that? can we allow them to publish in a transaction, just for convenience?

Reviewer 2: also, this tx proves that the multisig can sign

### Voting on the council
Once the council has been constructed, it can be voted on by governance particpants through a vote as structured below:

```rust
struct OnChainVote {
    id: u64,
    voter: Address,
    yay: proposalVote,
}
```

In turn the proposal vote will include the a structure like:

```rust
HashSet<(Address, u64)>
```

The structure contains all the counsils voted, where each cousil is specific as a pair `Address` (the enstablished address of the multisig account) and `u64` (spending cap)

These votes will then be used in order to vote for various PGF councils. Multiple councils can be voted on through a vector as represented above.

### CLI

TODOs:

- PGF Votes
- Construction of PGF council multisigs 

### Dealing with ties
In the rare occurance of a tie, the council with the lower spending_cap will win the tiebreak.

In the case of equal tiebreaks, the addresses with lower alphabetical order will be chosen. This is very arbitrary due to the expected low frequency.

### Ensuring enough votes 

> In order for a new PGF council to be elected (and hence halting the previous council's power), $\frac{1}{3}$ of validating power must vote on the "New PGF Council Proposal". Once this condition has been met, majority vote will be decided as to which PGF council will be elected.

Reviewer 2: majority? I think you mean the (council, spending_cap) pair with the most votes, right?

this is approval voting (a pretty standard mechanism, so worth using the name)

Reviewer: Do we need 1/3 of the voting power to vote on the proposal or to vote `Yay` on the proposal (regardless of the specific councils voted)? I'm thinking about a lot of voting power voting for `Nay` and a very small power voting for a council that ends up being elected

Reviewer 2: we need 1/3 to vote "yay" on the proposal, yeah - then the council with the most votes (which could be under 1/3) gets elected

### Electing the council

> Once the elected council has been decided upon, the established address corresponding to the multisig is added to the `PGF` internal address, and the `spending_cap` variable is stored.

Reviewer 2: we need to track spending_cap, the pgf VP should check that some spending_amount variable (reset to 0 on election of a new council) is incremented by the amount of any transfer

Reviewer 2: we still need to describe this, I think?

### End of Term Summary

> At the end of each term, the council is encouraged to submit a "summary"  which describes the funding decisions the councils have made and their reasoning for these decisions. This summary will act as an assessment of the council and will be the information point for governance to decide whether to re-elect the council. This summary should be made as transparant as pos

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At the end of each term, the council is encouraged to submit a "summary"  which describes the funding decisions the councils have made and their reasoning for these decisions. This summary will act as an assessment of the council and will be the information point for governance to decide whether to re-elect the council.
```

Reviewer 2: we can include other details later

## Mechanism

The governance proposal PGFCouncil elects the multisignature account address of the PGF council.

> The PGF council members will (by definition) be in charge of a "k of n" multisignature account whereby the $\text{10% inflation} * \text{spending_cap}$ is allocated and spent from the `PGF` internal address.

Reviewer 2: to be clear, the multisig does not itself hold the PGF internal funds, it is just allowed to spend them

}
```

```rust!
struct TxOut {
    // Destination addresses (can be a vector)
    address: Vec<Address>,
    // Asset identifier for this output
    token: NAM,
    // Asset value in the output, will happen each epoch
    amount: u64,
}
``` -->

The following data is attached to the PGF transaction and will allow the counsil to decide which projects will be continously funded. Each tuple reppresent the address and the respecting amount of NAM that will receive every epoch. The list of project will be stored in storage under the PGF internal address substorage space.

```rust
struct PFGTxData {
    projects: HashSet<(Address, u64)>
}
```

### rPGF (retroactive PGF)
No different logic compared to normal `Transfer` txs, except that it should allow for multiple receivers (see above).

## Addresses
Governance adds 1 internal address:

`PGF` internal address

The internal address VP will be allocated the 10% inflation of NAM. This will be added in addition to what was unspent by the previous council.
It will also implement the logic required in order to allow the cPGF transactions to be made. I.e finalize-block, which will send the addresses their respective amounts each end-of-epoch.

> The Governance address should also allow the burning of funds by the council.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this requires special handling

Reviewer 2: or, is there an argument for special handling?

Author: Regarding burning

The Namada PGF council is also granted a 5% income as a reward for conducting PGF activities (5% * 10% = 0.05% of total inflation). This will be a governance parameter subject to change.

## Voting for the Council

### Constructing the council
All valid PGF councils will be established multisignature account addresses. These must be created by the intdended parties that wish to create a council. The council will therefore have the discretion to decide what threshold will be required for their multisig (i.e the "k" in the "k out of n").

### Proposing Candidacy
The council will be responsible to publish this address to voters and express their desired `spending_cap`.

The `--spending-cap` argument is a `u8` $0 < x \leq 100$, which indicates the maximum percentage of the total funds available to the PGF council that the PGF council is able to spend during their term.

A council consisting of the same members should also be able to propose multiple spending caps (with the same multisig address). These will be voted on as separate councils and votes counted separately.

> Proposing candidacy as a PGF council is something that is done at any time. This simply signals to the rest of Governance that a given established multisignature account address is willing to be voted on during a PGF council election in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Proposing candidacy as a PGF council is something that is done at any time. This simply signals to the rest of governance that a given established multisignature account address is willing to be voted on during a PGF council election in the future.
```

Candidacy proposals last a default of 30 epochs. There is no limit to the number of times a council can be proposed for candidacy. This helps ensure that no PGF council is elected that does not intend to become one.

The structure of the candidacy proposal should be 

```rust 
  Map< epoch: Epoch, (council: Council, attestation: Url)>
```

### Initiating the vote

Before a new PGF council can be elected, a governance proposal that suggests a new PGF council must pass. This vote is handled by the governancea proposal type `PgfProposal`.

The the struct of `PgfProposal` is constructed as follows, and is explained in more detail in the [governance specs](../base-ledger/governance.md)

```rust
struct PgfProposal{
  id: u64
  content: Vec<u8>,
  author: Address,
  r#type: PGFCouncil,
  votingStartEpoch: Epoch,
  votingEndEpoch: Epoch,
  graceEpoch: Epoch,
}
```

> The above proposal type exists in order to determine *whether* a new PGF council will be elected. In order for a new PGF council to be elected (and hence halting the previous council's power), $\frac{1}{3}$ of validating power must vote on the `PgfProposal` and more than half of the votes must be in favor. If more than half of the votes are against no council is elected and the previous council's ability to spend funds (if applicable) is revoked. [Approval voting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Approval_voting#:~:text=Approval%20voting%20allows%20voters%20to,consider%20to%20be%20reasonable%20choices.) is employed in order to elect the new PGF council, *whilst* the `PgfProposal` is active. In other words, voters may vote for multiple PGF councils, and the council with the greatest proportion of votes will be elected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above proposal type exists in order to determine *whether* a new PGF council will be elected. In order for a new PGF council to be elected (and hence halting the previous council's power), $\frac{1}{3}$ of validating power must vote on the `PgfProposal` and more than half of the votes must be in favor. If more than half of the votes are against no council is elected and the previous council's ability to spend funds (if applicable) is revoked. [Approval voting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Approval_voting#:~:text=Approval%20voting%20allows%20voters%20to,consider%20to%20be%20reasonable%20choices.) is employed in order to elect the new PGF council, *whilst* the `PgfProposal` is active. In other words, voters may vote for multiple PGF councils, and the council & spending cap pair with the greatest proportion of votes will be elected.
```

```rust
struct OnChainVote {
    id: 2,
    voter: 0xalice,
    yay: proposalVote,
}
```

Whereby the `proposalVote` includes
```rust
HashSet<(address: 0xBobCharlieMultisig, spending_cap: 100)>
```

- At epoch 49, Bob submits an identical transaction.

- At epoch 50, Dave votes `Nay` on the proposal.

- At epoch 51, Elsa votes `Yay` but on the Councils `(address: 0xElsaAndSisterMultisig, spending_cap: 100)`  AND `(address: 0xBobCharlieMultisig, spending_cap: 100)`.

- At epoch 54, the voting period ends and the votes are tallied. Since 80% > 33% of the voting power voted on this proposal (everyone except Charlie), the intitial condition is passed and the Proposal is active. Further, because out of the total votes, most were `Yay`, (75% > 50% threshold), a new council will be elected. The council that received the most votes, in this case `0xBobCharlieMultisig` is elected the new PGF council. The Council `(address: 0xElsaAndSisterMultisig, spending_cap: 50)` actually received 0 votes because Elsa's vote included the wrong spending_cap.

- At epoch 57, Bob and Charlie have the effective power to carry out Public Goods Funding transactions.
````

### End of Term Summary

> At the end of each term, the council is encouraged to submit a "summary"  which describes the funding decisions the councils have made and their reasoning for these decisions. This summary will act as an assessment of the council and will be the information point for governance to decide whether to re-elect the council.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At the end of each term, the council is encouraged to submit a "summary"  which describes the funding decisions the councils have made and their reasoning for these decisions. This summary will act as an assessment of the council and will be the primary document on the basis of which governance should decide whether to re-elect the council.
```

The collecting member of the council will then be responsible for submitting this tx through the multisig. The multisig will only accept the tx if this is true.

The PGF council should be able to make both retroactive and continuous public funding transactions. Retroactive public funding transactions should be straightforward and implement no additional logic to a normal transfer.

However, for continuous PGF (cPGF), the council should be able to submit a one time transaction which indicates the recipient addresses that should be eligble for receiveing cPGF. 

The following data is attached to the PGF transaction and will allow the council to decide which projects will be continously funded. Each tuple represent the address and the respective amount of NAM that the recipient will receive every epoch.

```rust
struct cPgfRecipients {
    recipients: HashSet<(Address, u64)>
}
```
The mechanism for these transfers will be implemented in `finalize-block.rs`, which will send the addresses their respective amounts each end-of-epoch.
Further, the following transactions should be added in order to ease the management of cPGF recipients.

```rust

> impl addRecipient for cPgfRecipients

Reviewer 2: this is not clear, needs to be described

```

The structure contains all the counsils voted, where each cousil is specified as a pair `Address` (the enstablished address of the multisig account) and `u64` (spending cap).

These votes will then be used in order to vote for various PGF councils. Multiple councils can be voted on through a vector as represented above.

#### Dealing with ties
In the rare occurance of a tie, the council with the lower spending_cap will win the tiebreak.

In the case of equal tiebreaks, the addresses with lower alphabetical order will be chosen. This is very arbitrary due to the expected low frequency.

### Electing the council

Once the elected council has been decided upon, the established address corresponding to the multisig is added to the `PGF` internal address, and the `spending_cap` variable is stored.

### Example

The below example hopefully demonstrates the mechanism more clearly.

````admonish note
The governance set consists of Alice, Bob, Charlie, Dave, and Elsa. Each member has 20% voting power.

The current PGF council consits of Dave and Elsa.

- At epoch 42, Alice proposes the `PgfProposal` with the following struct:

```rust
struct PgfProposal{
  id: 2

>   content: Vec<32,54,01,24,13,37>,

Reviewer 2: what is this exactly? serialised something?

  author: 0xalice,
  r#type: PGFCouncil,
  votingStartEpoch: Epoch(45),
  votingEndEpoch: Epoch(54),
  graceEpoch: Epoch(57),
}
```

- At epoch 47, after seeing this proposal go live, Bob and Charlie decide to put themselves forward as a PGF council. They construct a multisig with address `0xBobCharlieMultisig` and broadcast it on Namada using the CLI. They set their `spending_cap` to `1.0`. (They could have done this before the proposal went live as well).

- At epoch 48, Elsa broadcasts a multisig PGF council address which includes herself and her sister.

- At epoch 49, Alice submits the vote:

```rust
struct OnChainVote {
    id: 2,
    voter: 0xalice,
    yay: proposalVote,
}
```

Whereby the `proposalVote` includes
```rust
HashSet<(address: 0xBobCharlieMultisig, spending_cap: 1.0)>
```

> - At epoch 49, Bob and Charlie submit identical transactions. Charlie also 

Reviewer 2: Charlie also what?

- At epoch 50, Dave votes `Nay` on the proposal.

> - At epoch 51, Elsa votes `Yay` but on the multisigs `0xElsaAndSisterMultisig` AND `0xBobCharlieMultisig`.

Reviewer 2: With what spending caps?

### PGF council transactions
The PGF council members will be responsible for collecting signatures offline. One member will then be responsinble for submitting a transaction containing at least $k $ out of the signatures.

The collecting member of the council will then be responsible for submitting this tx through the multisig. The multisig will only accept the tx if this is true.

Note that there is no cap to $n$ in $k$-out-of-$n$ apart from the limitations of the multisig account.

The PGF council should be able to make both retroactive and continuous public funding transactions. Retroactive public funding transactions should be straightforward and implement no additional logic to a normal transfer.

However, for continuous PGF (cPGF), the council should be able to submit a one time transaction which indicates the recipient addresses that should be eligble for receiveing cPGF. 

> The following data is attached to the PGF transaction and will allow the counsil to decide which projects will be continously funded. Each tuple represent the address and the respecting amount of NAM that will receive every epoch. The list of funding recipients will be stored in storage under the PGF internal address substorage space.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following data is attached to the cPGF transaction and will allow the counsil to decide which projects will be continously funded. Each tuple represent the address and the respecting amount of NAM that will receive every epoch. The list of funding recipients will be stored in storage under the PGF internal address substorage space.
```

```rust

> struct cPgfRecipients {

Reviewer 2: Probably we should have a transaction to add a recipient and a transaction to remove a recipient, just for ease of use by the council

Reviewer 2: bump

Author: I think I added this

The council should be able to burn funds (up to their spending cap), but this hopefully should not require additional functionality beyond what currently exists.

Further, the VP should contain the parameter that dictates the number of epochs a candidacy is valid for once it has been broadcasted and before it needs to be renewed.

### VP checks

The VP must check that the council does not exceed its spending cap.

The VP must also check that the any spending is only done by a the correctly elected PGF council multisig address.

## Storage

### Storage keys

Each recipient will be listed under this storage space (for cPGF)
- `/PGFAddress/cPGF_recipients/Address = Amount`
- `/PGFAddress/spending_cap = Amount`
- `/PGFAddress/spent_amount = Amount`
- `/PGFAddress/candidacy_length = u8`
- `/pgf/counsil_candidates/epoch = HashSet<Council>`
- `/PGFAddress/council/epoch = Council` (The council that was elected at epoch `epoch`)

### Struct

```rust
struct Council {
    address: Address,
    spending_cap_amount: u64,
    spent_amount: u64,
}
```

> The spending cap amount here is different from the `spending_cap` float. This is an actual NAM value that is calculated through `spending_cap * PGF_VP.balance`

Reviewer 2: float? where's a float? there should never be any floats anywhere ever :smile:

Reviewer 2: also I don't understand what this is - why would we multiply the spending cap by the balance?

Author: Well I thought of spending_cap as a percentage of the balance. I guess we can make it a uint as well and it directly be the literal amount of NAM. Benefit of percentage is that it is interpretable and easy to remember whereas Amount is not (could be many zeros).

Reviewer: You can use the `Amount` type for the spending cap

Author: I just don't think `Amount` is interpretable and can lead to a lot of misvotes. I'd rather use a percentage for spending cap.

> 

Reviewer 2: can we delete the extra spaces

### Funding amounts

> In Namada, up to 10% inflation per annum of the NAM token is directed to this public goods mechanism. The division of these funds is entirely the discretion of the elected PGF council.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Namada, up to 10% inflation per annum of the NAM token is directed to this public goods mechanism. The further division of these funds is entirely up to the discretion of the elected PGF council.
```

Namada encourages the public goods council to adopt a default social consensus of an equal split between categories, meaning 1.25% per annum inflation for each category (e.g. 1.25% for technical research continuous funding, 1.25% for technical research retroactive PGF). If no qualified recipients are available, funds may be redirected or burnt.

> Namada also encourages the PGF council to allocate the PGF council members up to 5% of these funds (0.5% inflation) as a payment for value added from the council itself.

Reviewer 2: This one we should hardcode, I think - it should be a protocol parameter - we don't really want councils to be competing on how much they pay themselves.

Author: Good idea

## Voting for the Council

### Constructing the council
All valid PGF councils will be established multisignature account addresses. These must be created by the intdended parties that wish to create a council. The council will therefore have the discretion to decide what threshold will be required for their multisig (i.e the "k" in the "k out of n").

> A new multisignature address will be constructed through the CLI with the following command

Reviewer 2: This is great but it should be in the docs not the specs (we don't need command examples in the specs)

Author: :+1:

```bash!
namada client init-account \
--alias my-multisig \
--publickeys pk1,pk2,pk3... \
--signers signer1,signer2,signer3... \
--threshold k
```

### Proposing Candidacy
The council will be responsible to publish this address to voters and express their desired `spending_cap`. This will be done directly to the ledger through the following CLI command:

> ```bash!

Reviewer 2: Ditto, this should be in the docs

A council consisting of the same members should also be able to propose multiple spending caps (with the same multisig address). These will be voted on as separate councils and votes counted separately.

Proposing candidacy as a PGF council is something that is done at any time. This simply signals to the rest of Governance that a given established multisignature account address is willing to be voted on during a PGF council election in the future.

> Candidacy proposals last a default of 31 epochs. There is no limit to the number of times a council can be proposed for candidacy. This helps ensure that no PGF council is elected that does not intend to become one.

Reviewer: I think we can either use a `Map<Council, (Epoch, Url)>` or `VecDeque<(Council, Epoch, Url)>` where `Council = (Address, spending_cap)` to store the candidates in storage.

At each epoch, we can remove from this collection the expired candidacies. If we use the queue, the voters can use the indexes of the queue to specify their choices (even though this might be more error prone

Author: What is the benefit of using the queue? What do you mean by indexes of the queue to specify choices?

Reviewer: We can use a `Vec` as well, with a queue we might be faster in certain operations (like pruning from the head). A voter can use the index of the council in the vector (or queue) instead of providing the tuple `(Address, spending_cap)`. At the moment I'm more concerned of what happens if some candidates are dropped in the middle of a voting period

Reviewer: If we remove expired candidacies during a voting period indexes would point to another council so this is not safe. At this point we can use the `Map` I'd say

At the end of each term, the council is encouraged to submit a "summary"  which describes the funding decisions the councils have made and their reasoning for these decisions. This summary will act as an assessment of the council and will be the information point for governance to decide whether to re-elect the council.

## Mechanism

Once elected and instantiated, members of the PGF council will then unilaterally be able to propose and sign transactions for this purpose. The PGF council multisig will have an "allowance" to spend up to the `PGF` internal address's balance multiplied by the `spending_cap` variable.  Consensus on these transactions, in addition to motivation behind them will be handled off-chain, and should be recorded for the purposes of the "End of Term Summary".

### PGF council transactions
The PGF council members will be responsible for collecting signatures offline. One member will then be responsinble for submitting a transaction containing at least $k $ out of the signatures.

The collecting member of the council will then be responsible for submitting this tx through the multisig. The multisig will only accept the tx if this is true.

> Note that there is no cap to $n$ in $k$-out-of-$n$ apart from the limitations of the multisig account.

Reviewer 2: no, I don't think this is necessary

}
```

## Storage

### Storage keys

Each recipient will be listed under this storage space (for cPGF)

> - `/PGFAddress/active_projects/Address = Amount`

Reviewer 3: add `spending_cap` and `spent_amount`
